History of Aalto RSE
====================

The term "Research Software Engineer" was first heard around by us
around 2018 as part of the `CodeRefinery
<https://coderefinery.org>`__ project.  At first, the hearer didn't
understand what it was, but by 2019 it was clear, and clear that we
needed something like this.

Why did we need this?  Because it's what we were already doing, and
what our researchers.  By connecting to an existing concept,
we would be able to make our work more professional.  But what was "research
software engineer" to us?  We took a very inclusive view: someone that
was somewhere between the technology of research, and the research
itself.  By this view, we were all already RSEs (although most of us
focused more on basic infrastructure than close scientific support).
Still, the idea that we could focus more on direct researcher needs
was very interesting to us.


Initial motivation
------------------

What would a new "research software engineer" team allow us to do?
The basic idea was "more of what we were doing", but we needed to
justify more.

**Saving time.** A story from some of our research past: Once, one of
us was helping someone with preprocessing some data.  We took a few
days of our own time to import the data into a sqlite3 database, and
an hour per day over the next week to teach them how to query it with
SQL (going back and forth and adjusting the database to their needs).
They soon caught on and a few weeks later came back with the comment:
"if someone had helped me with this when I started my PhD, I could
have saved three months of time by now".  As a organized team, we
could easily make a case of saving far more time than we are using.

**More equitable research.** Sure, some researchers are fortunate
enough to have the background and time to learn everything, but modern
universities are diverse and interdisciplinary.  Without good
computational support structures (which modern academics don't have
time to do themselves, with all the demands placed on them), plenty of
people get left behind.

Our management cared about the above, so was supportive of our
project.

**Better research practices.** We can make research more reproducible,
shareable, and open.  To be honest, this is a hard sell, since it
sounds like something that should be solved by the academics
themselves: if they need X they can hire for X.  (Since we are hosted
under an academic school, not a service unit, you could argue that we
*are* academics hiring for X).

One criticism that came up was that "academics know how to do things
themselves".  Our later experiences clearly have shown that with a big
enough audience, plenty of people desperately needing help in
everything we offer.  Modern science is too complex for anyone to know
everything.


Initial years
-------------

We started with basic funding for two full-time staff: 50% funded by
the School of Science and 50% funded by three departments within the
School of Science.  The staff would focus on these units while working
to find project funding.

Our initial work came from HPC cluster users (and this continues to be
a big customer segment).  By looking at our existing issues, we could
find plenty of researchers who needed more help than we could provide
with our basic cluster support.  We could also identify users who had
inefficient workflows or other usage problems and direct them to the
RSE support.  This easily gave us plenty of work.

.. figure:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AaltoSciComp/aaltoscicomp-graphics/master/figures/rse-alignment.png
   :alt: 3x3 table with "programming", "workflows integration", "data"
	 across the top and "help you do it", "do it with you", and
	 "do it for you" along the side.

   Example range of projects we do: we aren't just "software" but many
   things.  We don't just do long term projects but plenty of
   short-term support too.  We sometimes do things outside of this
   table.

Over time (months), we could continue to find people through our
existing support channels, and also drop-ins who specifically came for
RSE support (still, many of these were cluster users) from our funding
units. Very many RSE projects came from someone who arrived asking
about some seeming-simple research task, but it turns out to properly
accomplish their goal there's actually a lot of development or
debugging that needs doing.  We can do that for them, so they can
focus on what they need.

Our long-term funding goal was to receive a significant amount of
funding from projects (as in: from external grants).  Some initial
projects were willing to fund us, but the finance practicalities were
too complex (too much effort to internally transfer the money) and
this didn't happen as soon as we wanted.  Our school and departments
were happy to have us support research while waiting for the funding
to be sorted out.

We never had any shortage of work to do: with a minimal amount of
advertisement, we had a steady stream of projects that was neither too
much nor too little.


Steady state (2022-)
---------------------

Projects continued to come in about as fast as we could do them: no
advertising needed, also the delay to starting a project wasn't that
long.

We got some big projects funders: some flagship projects funded
full-time 100% RSEs as part of our team.  They would be dedicated to
that project, but in practice our whole team is working together on
whatever projects there may be.  This model seemed to work pretty
well.

We did work out a sustainable project funding method: the general
agreement was that projects taking less than a month would be funded
under basic funding, while projects would be expected to fund work
lasting more than a month themselves.  This was the right balance of
"project funding" and "minimize administrative overhead" while giving
the best benefit.  Yes, this was a significant investment into
research quality.  With this system, several projects began providing
us with funding.

We also received funding from our university's IT Services.  They
often had support requests which went beyond IT support into "research
software engineer" support, and thus began providing funding projects
outside the School of Science.  This eventually became an established
funding source.

When you consider funding from stuff dedicated 100% to projects,
smaller project funding, and IT Services funding, we certainly have
most of our funding coming from project sources.

All during this time, we never had a shortage of projects.  More and
more projects came specifically as RSE projects, and not as cluster
usage help requests.  We maintained a nice self-emerging balance,
where our projects were in balance with the time available without us
having to do any advertisement.  (On the other hand, this mean we
probably weren't reaching the people who most needed us, so this isn't
exactly a good thing).


Future (As of 2024)
-------------------

We clearly have more projects than we can manage, and the scheduling
delay is becoming longer and longer.  This is even as our effective
team size and funding has increased.  Our projects come from a wider
variety of schools, and lots of time is spent on basic issues.

We're thinking of the largest team size that makes sense, both from
keeping it managed and fitting in with the academic system.

We'll need to think about how to scale to and support work from more
schools at Aalto.  Funding should come from more diverse sources, and
we should try to support projects and researchers earlier, rather than
getting projects after they are started and need revisions.
